Create Blog Post “at-the-cross-roads-of-risk-factors-how-the-duncan-unit-became-a-hotbed-for-covid19” (#524)
texas-justice-initiative/website-nextjs: content/blog/posts/at-the-cross-roads-of-risk-factors-how-the-duncan-unit-became-a-hotbed-for-covid19.md

---
title: "At the Cross Roads of Risk Factors: How the Duncan Unit Became a Hotbed
  for COVID19"
date: 2021-02-04
author: Margarita Bronshteyn
hero: ""
---
<!--StartFragment-->

> In June of 2020, the executive director of the Texas Justice Initiative, Eva Ruth Moravec, started noticing a disturbing trend in the custodial death data - an alarming number of [announcements about COVID-related deaths](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/covid-19/index2.html) were coming from the same unit. In fact, of the 48 incarcerated individuals who died from COVID19 in Texas detention centers in June 2020, 14 were from the Duncan Unit. Meaning, that a unit that accounted for [0.3% of the state prison population](https://gritsforbreakfast.blogspot.com/search?q=covid+release) was suddenly reporting nearly 30% of the COVID19 deaths that month. Together with Margarita Bronshteyn, one of TJI’s data scientists, Eva Ruth set out to understand what was driving this mortality rate and to shed light on those who died behind bars without a life sentence.

Author: That was a direct line from the previous medium post. The link seems to suggest the numbers are about the whole TDCJ population. Which I think could make sense. Though this article suggests that it might be just the prisons:
https://www.texastribune.org/2020/12/01/texas-prisons-close-understaffing/#:~:text=%E2%80%9CThe%20population%20is%20122%2C000%20and,population%20for%20TDCJ%20since%201995.%E2%80%9D

> In June of 2020, the executive director of the Texas Justice Initiative, Eva Ruth Moravec, started noticing a disturbing trend in the custodial death data - an alarming number of [announcements about COVID-related deaths](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/covid-19/index2.html) were coming from the same unit. In fact, of the 48 incarcerated individuals who died from COVID19 in Texas detention centers in June 2020, 14 were from the Duncan Unit. Meaning, that a unit that accounted for [0.3% of the state prison population](https://gritsforbreakfast.blogspot.com/search?q=covid+release) was suddenly reporting nearly 30% of the COVID19 deaths that month. Together with Margarita Bronshteyn, one of TJI’s data scientists, Eva Ruth set out to understand what was driving this mortality rate and to shed light on those who died behind bars without a life sentence.

Reviewer: I read that "in the TDCJ system as a whole" to include state jails too. I think we're good assuming that it's total

> In June of 2020, the executive director of the Texas Justice Initiative, Eva Ruth Moravec, started noticing a disturbing trend in the custodial death data - an alarming number of [announcements about COVID-related deaths](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/covid-19/index2.html) were coming from the same unit. In fact, of the 48 incarcerated individuals who died from COVID19 in Texas detention centers in June 2020, 14 were from the Duncan Unit. Meaning, that a unit that accounted for [0.3% of the state prison population](https://gritsforbreakfast.blogspot.com/search?q=covid+release) was suddenly reporting nearly 30% of the COVID19 deaths that month. Together with Margarita Bronshteyn, one of TJI’s data scientists, Eva Ruth set out to understand what was driving this mortality rate and to shed light on those who died behind bars without a life sentence.

Author: ok then I will accept these changes!

> In June of 2020, the executive director of the Texas Justice Initiative, Eva Ruth Moravec, started noticing a disturbing trend in the custodial death data - an alarming number of [announcements about COVID-related deaths](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/covid-19/index2.html) were coming from the same unit. In fact, of the 48 incarcerated individuals who died from COVID19 in Texas detention centers in June 2020, 14 were from the Duncan Unit. Meaning, that a unit that accounted for [0.3% of the state prison population](https://gritsforbreakfast.blogspot.com/search?q=covid+release) was suddenly reporting nearly 30% of the COVID19 deaths that month. Together with Margarita Bronshteyn, one of TJI’s data scientists, Eva Ruth set out to understand what was driving this mortality rate and to shed light on those who died behind bars without a life sentence.

Author: Actually quick question - do you think we should change the link on the .3% from the current link to the texastribune one?

> In June of 2020, the executive director of the Texas Justice Initiative, Eva Ruth Moravec, started noticing a disturbing trend in the custodial death data - an alarming number of [announcements about COVID-related deaths](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/covid-19/index2.html) were coming from the same unit. In fact, of the 48 incarcerated individuals who died from COVID19 in Texas detention centers in June 2020, 14 were from the Duncan Unit. Meaning, that a unit that accounted for [0.3% of the state prison population](https://gritsforbreakfast.blogspot.com/search?q=covid+release) was suddenly reporting nearly 30% of the COVID19 deaths that month. Together with Margarita Bronshteyn, one of TJI’s data scientists, Eva Ruth set out to understand what was driving this mortality rate and to shed light on those who died behind bars without a life sentence.

Reviewer: > Actually quick question - do you think we should change the link on the .3% from the current link to the texastribune one?

sure!

> The Rufus H. Duncan Unit is a minimum-security lockup and one of Texas’ dedicated geriatric prisons. In June, the Duncan Unit housed [just over 400 inmates](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/kss_inside.html) - nearly all of whom were over 55 years old. For many of those incarcerated in the Duncan unit, the intersection of incarceration and older age (often coupled with pre-existing conditions) proved to be one to many [risk factors](https://theintercept.com/2020/05/06/coronavirus-prison-jail-mass-incarceration/) when it came to COVID19. In just four weeks, the virus had infected 70% of the inmates and a third of the employees. As the summer wore on, the numbers continued to grow and [TDCJ stopped reporting](https://txdps.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/dce4d7da662945178ad5fbf3981fa35c) how many inmates and employees had been infected in the Unit.

Author: So I was actually thinking of making it a blend and changing it to "getting and dying from covid-19" or something like that. Which would be an honest statement (there is a reason older adults are the vaccination priority right now).

So I was unsure how to phrase that either. It was inspired by the fact that previously on the dashboard, when you clicked on a specific unit, the numbers in the big box of total counts etc would update to just reflect that unit however now they remain static for always displaying all of TDCJ so you can't see how many people have recovered (as in, contracted) COVID-19 in that specific unit

> The Rufus H. Duncan Unit is a minimum-security lockup and one of Texas’ dedicated geriatric prisons. In June, the Duncan Unit housed [just over 400 inmates](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/kss_inside.html) - nearly all of whom were over 55 years old. For many of those incarcerated in the Duncan unit, the intersection of incarceration and older age (often coupled with pre-existing conditions) proved to be one to many [risk factors](https://theintercept.com/2020/05/06/coronavirus-prison-jail-mass-incarceration/) when it came to COVID19. In just four weeks, the virus had infected 70% of the inmates and a third of the employees. As the summer wore on, the numbers continued to grow and [TDCJ stopped reporting](https://txdps.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/dce4d7da662945178ad5fbf3981fa35c) how many inmates and employees had been infected in the Unit.

Reviewer: Ah, ok. How about "As the summer wore on, the total cases continued to grow but weren't reflected in TDCJ's dashboard, which only shows current case data." ?

> The Rufus H. Duncan Unit is a minimum-security lockup and one of Texas’ dedicated geriatric prisons. In June, the Duncan Unit housed [just over 400 inmates](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/kss_inside.html) - nearly all of whom were over 55 years old. For many of those incarcerated in the Duncan unit, the intersection of incarceration and older age (often coupled with pre-existing conditions) proved to be one to many [risk factors](https://theintercept.com/2020/05/06/coronavirus-prison-jail-mass-incarceration/) when it came to COVID19. In just four weeks, the virus had infected 70% of the inmates and a third of the employees. As the summer wore on, the numbers continued to grow and [TDCJ stopped reporting](https://txdps.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/dce4d7da662945178ad5fbf3981fa35c) how many inmates and employees had been infected in the Unit.

Author: So my concern with that phrasing is that I want to stress that those numbers used to be reflected but then weren't and that change meant that we stopped knowing the percentage of people that had been infected in the unit.

How do you think it is best to phrase that?

> The Rufus H. Duncan Unit is a minimum-security lockup and one of Texas’ dedicated geriatric prisons. In June, the Duncan Unit housed [just over 400 inmates](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/kss_inside.html) - nearly all of whom were over 55 years old. For many of those incarcerated in the Duncan unit, the intersection of incarceration and older age (often coupled with pre-existing conditions) proved to be one to many [risk factors](https://theintercept.com/2020/05/06/coronavirus-prison-jail-mass-incarceration/) when it came to COVID19. In just four weeks, the virus had infected 70% of the inmates and a third of the employees. As the summer wore on, the numbers continued to grow and [TDCJ stopped reporting](https://txdps.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/dce4d7da662945178ad5fbf3981fa35c) how many inmates and employees had been infected in the Unit.

Reviewer: > So my concern with that phrasing is that I want to stress that those numbers used to be reflected but then weren't and that change meant that we stopped knowing the percentage of people that had been infected in the unit.
> 
> How do you think it is best to phrase that?

How about - "As the summer wore on, TDCJ changed the way it reported data and TJI was unable to tell the total percentage of people who'd been infected at a particular unit."

> The Rufus H. Duncan Unit is a minimum-security lockup and one of Texas’ dedicated geriatric prisons. In June, the Duncan Unit housed [just over 400 inmates](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/kss_inside.html) - nearly all of whom were over 55 years old. For many of those incarcerated in the Duncan unit, the intersection of incarceration and older age (often coupled with pre-existing conditions) proved to be one to many [risk factors](https://theintercept.com/2020/05/06/coronavirus-prison-jail-mass-incarceration/) when it came to COVID19. In just four weeks, the virus had infected 70% of the inmates and a third of the employees. As the summer wore on, the numbers continued to grow and [TDCJ stopped reporting](https://txdps.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/dce4d7da662945178ad5fbf3981fa35c) how many inmates and employees had been infected in the Unit.

Author: love it! Updating it now

However, as people age, they also become far less likely to offend. Developed nearly four decades ago by Travis Hirschi and Michael Gottfredson, the “[age-crime curve](http://troublesofyouth.pbworks.com/f/age+and+the+explanation+of+crime+-+Hirschi+and+Gott.pdf)” has been a guidepost for assessing the likelihood of a returning citizen reoffending. Hirschi and Gottfreson found that, regardless of the person’ sex, criminality spikes between the ages of 12 and 25 after which there is a steep decline until reaching near-zero numbers by the age of 55. According to this model, the overwhelming majority of those incarcerated in the Duncan Unit would pose little to no risk to society upon release.

> In fact, more than two-thirds of the Duncan Unit was parole eligible as of July 2020 and most of them (208 of 270) had been parole eligible for more than a year. Of the 21 men who died after contracting COVID while serving time in the Duncan Unit, 13 had served at least half their sentence, 17 were eligible for parole, and all were over the age of 60. Among these men were Jose Faide Morones, 70, who had completed his sentence but was denied parole in May of this year; and Jimmy Ray Price, 82, who’d served 24 years on a 25-year sentence and had been eligible for parole for 11 years, but was denied parole last spring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In fact, more than two-thirds of the Duncan Unit was parole-eligible as of July 2020 – and most of those individuals (208 of 270) had been parole-eligible for more than one year. Of the 21 men who died after contracting COVID-19 while serving time at the Duncan Unit, 13 had served at least half their sentence, 17 were eligible for parole, and all 21 were over the age of 60. Among these men were Jose Faide Morones, 70, who had completed his sentence but was denied parole in May 2020; and Jimmy Ray Price, 82, who’d served 24 years on a 25-year sentence and had been eligible for parole for 11 years, but was denied parole last spring.
```

Reviewer: would it make sense to add when Morones and Price died? and/or links to their custodial death reports?

Author: I'm torn on this. Not sure what adding when they died would add since we are already saying that this is sometime between last March and December throughout the blog so I don't know if saying they died in July or Aug would really add much. I'm intrigued by the idea of linking to the custodial death reports.

Reviewer: Great -- the links will give people the date of death if they're curious too. 
```suggestion
In fact, more than two-thirds of the Duncan Unit was parole eligible as of July 2020 and most of them (208 of 270) had been parole eligible for more than a year. Of the 21 men who died after contracting COVID while serving time in the Duncan Unit, 13 had served at least half their sentence, 17 were eligible for parole, and all were over the age of 60. Among these men were [Jose Faide Morones, 70](https://oagtx.force.com/cdr/VIPForm__VIP_FormWizardPDF?id=a2Ct00000038tpEEAQ&templateId=a2x5A000001M2UWQA0), who had completed his sentence but was denied parole in May of this year; and [Jimmy Ray Price, 82](https://oagtx.force.com/cdr/VIPForm__VIP_FormWizardPDF?id=a2Ct0000002lalsEAA&templateId=a2x5A000001M2UWQA0), who’d served 24 years on a 25-year sentence and had been eligible for parole for 11 years, but was denied parole last spring.
```

> So why are parole-eligible individuals not being released? According to Desel, additional measures, such as weeks-long precautionary lockdowns, were used to stop the spread of the virus and these lockdowns meant that everything came to a grinding halt. Movement was restricted and individuals were [kept away from courses](https://www.texastribune.org/2020/04/14/coronavirus-alters-texas-prisoners-parole-programs-required-release/) that are required for release on parole. Although TDCJ [did resume the classes](https://www.statesman.com/news/20200617/texas-resumes-prison-transfers-for-coronavirus-free-parolees) in late June, it has been a slow process. “\[I]t’s going to be a long ordeal,” said a woman who volunteers with the Texas Inmate Families Association. “A lot of these gentlemen are elderly and may not have any family left.” 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So why are parole-eligible individuals not being released? According to Desel, additional measures, such as weeks-long precautionary lockdowns, were used to stop the spread of the virus and these lockdowns meant that everything came to a grinding halt. Movement was restricted and individuals were [kept away from courses](https://www.texastribune.org/2020/04/14/coronavirus-alters-texas-prisoners-parole-programs-required-release/) that are required for release on parole. Although TDCJ [did resume the classes](https://www.statesman.com/news/20200617/texas-resumes-prison-transfers-for-coronavirus-free-parolees) in late June, it has been a slow process. “\[I]t’s going to be a long ordeal,” a woman who volunteers with the Texas Inmate Families Association told TJI. “A lot of these gentlemen are elderly and may not have any family left.” 
```

> Other jurisdictions, such as those in [New York](http://criminaljustice.cityofnewyork.us/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/MOCJ-COVID-19-Jail-Reduction.pdf) and [Illinois](https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/17/us/cook-county-jail-coronavirius/index.html), began releasing some of their incarcerated population in March after widespread outbreaks in their facilities. In both states, the age-crime curve informed their decision making for who to release. While New York prioritized releasing offenders over the age of 50 and Illinois prioritized those over 60, both states heavily weighed the presence of pre-existing conditions when reviewing cases for early-release. In both states, most releases have been the equivalent of 3rd-degree felonies or lower (see: [Illinois’s IDOC spreadsheet](https://www2.illinois.gov/idoc/Offender/Pages/CommunityNotificationofInmateEarlyRelease.aspx) for the full list of COVID-related releases). Researchers and reporters are no doubt watching to see if there are any spikes in crime associated with the release of geriatric offenders in either state. Thus far, [no publications](https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/usa-jails-release/) suggest an increase in crime due to geriatric returning citizens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Facilities in other states like [New York](http://criminaljustice.cityofnewyork.us/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/MOCJ-COVID-19-Jail-Reduction.pdf) and [Illinois](https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/17/us/cook-county-jail-coronavirius/index.html) began releasing some of their incarcerated population in March after experiencing widespread outbreaks. In both states, the age-crime curve informed their decisions regarding whom to release. While New York prioritized releasing offenders over the age of 50 and Illinois prioritized those over 60, both states heavily weighed the presence of pre-existing conditions when reviewing cases for early-release. In both states, most releases have been the equivalent of 3rd-degree felonies or lower (see: [Illinois’s IDOC spreadsheet](https://www2.illinois.gov/idoc/Offender/Pages/CommunityNotificationofInmateEarlyRelease.aspx) for the full list of COVID-related releases). Researchers and reporters are no doubt watching to see if there are any spikes in crime associated with the release of offenders in either state – thus far, [no publications](https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/usa-jails-release/) suggest so. 
```

---
title: "At the Cross Roads of Risk Factors: How the Duncan Unit Became a Hotbed
  for COVID19"
date: 2021-02-04
author: Margarita Bronshteyn
hero: ""
---
<!--StartFragment-->

> In June of 2020, the executive director of the Texas Justice Initiative, Eva Ruth Moravec, started noticing a disturbing trend in the custodial death data - an alarming number of [Texas Department of Criminal Justice's announcements about deaths by COVID-19](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/covid-19/index2.html) were coming from the same unit. In fact, of the 48 incarcerated individuals who died from COVID-19 in state-operated prisons and jails in June 2020, 14 were from the Duncan Unit. To put this another way: a unit that housed [0.3% of the state's prison population](https://gritsforbreakfast.blogspot.com/search?q=covid+release) was suddenly reporting nearly 30% of the COVID-19 deaths that month. Together with Margarita Bronshteyn, one of TJI’s data scientists, Eva Ruth set out to understand what was driving this mortality rate and to shed light on those who died behind bars due to the pandemic, not a life sentence.

Author: ```suggestion
In June of 2020, the executive director of the Texas Justice Initiative, Eva Ruth Moravec, started noticing a disturbing trend in the custodial death data - an alarming number of [Texas Department of Criminal Justice's announcements about deaths by COVID-19](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/covid-19/index2.html) were coming from the same unit. In fact, of the 48 incarcerated individuals who died from COVID-19 in state-operated prisons and jails in June 2020, 14 were from the Duncan Unit. To put this another way: a unit that housed [0.3% of the state's prison population](https://www.texastribune.org/2020/12/01/texas-prisons-close-understaffing/#:~:text=%E2%80%9CThe%20population%20is%20122%2C000%20and,population%20for%20TDCJ%20since%201995.%E2%80%9D) was suddenly reporting nearly 30% of the COVID-19 deaths that month. Together with Margarita Bronshteyn, one of TJI’s data scientists, Eva Ruth set out to understand what was driving this mortality rate and to shed light on those who died behind bars due to the pandemic, not a life sentence.
```

> In June of 2020, the executive director of the Texas Justice Initiative, Eva Ruth Moravec, started noticing a disturbing trend in the custodial death data - an alarming number of [Texas Department of Criminal Justice's announcements about deaths by COVID-19](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/covid-19/index2.html) were coming from the same unit. In fact, of the 48 incarcerated individuals who died from COVID-19 in state-operated prisons and jails in June 2020, 14 were from the Duncan Unit. To put this another way: a unit that housed [0.3% of the state's prison population](https://www.texastribune.org/2020/12/01/texas-prisons-close-understaffing/#:~:text=%E2%80%9CThe%20population%20is%20122%2C000%20and,population%20for%20TDCJ%20since%201995.%E2%80%9D) was suddenly reporting nearly 30% of the COVID-19 deaths that month. Together with Margarita Bronshteyn, one of TJI’s data scientists, Eva Ruth set out to understand what was driving this mortality rate and to shed light on those who died behind bars due to the pandemic, not a life sentence.

Author: ```suggestion
In June of 2020, the executive director of the Texas Justice Initiative, Eva Ruth Moravec, started noticing a disturbing trend in the custodial death data - an alarming number of [Texas Department of Criminal Justice's announcements about deaths by COVID-19](https://www.tdcj.texas.gov/covid-19/index2.html) were coming from the same unit. In fact, of the 48 incarcerated individuals who died from COVID-19 in state-operated prisons and jails in June 2020, 14 were from the Duncan Unit. To put this another way: a unit that housed [0.3% of the state's prison population](https://www.texastribune.org/2020/12/01/texas-prisons-close-understaffing/#:~:text=%E2%80%9CThe%20population%20is%20122%2C000%20and,population%20for%20TDCJ%20since%201995.%E2%80%9D) was suddenly reporting nearly 30% of the COVID-19 deaths that month. Together with Margarita Bronshteyn, one of TJI’s data scientists, Eva Ruth set out to understand what was driving this mortality rate and to shed light on those who died behind bars due to the pandemic, not a life sentence.
```
